If the Fed raises interest, if the Fed
lowers interest rates, it doesn't
matter. We will still have an AI boom.
If the Fed lowers interest rates, if the
Fed raises interest rates, it doesn't
matter. Politicians are still saying we
need to do home storing of manufacturing
capacity. And finally, also the one big
beautiful bill, same story. If the Fed
raises rates, it doesn't matter. It has
already been written in the law. The
money is already being paid out. So, in
that sense, when rates have gone up, the
economy has not been slowing down.
>> Hello [music] and welcome to another
episode of the Odd Lots podcast. I'm
Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> [music]
>> So, Joe, we had that live show in New
York.
>> Yeah.
>> And we recorded multiple episodes. We
thought just to challenge ourselves, we
would do something a little bit
different, which was a bold move for an
audio-focused podcast, but we decided we
would try to have a visual segment,
right?
>> That's right. And it was also it was a
nice move cuz we got a break. This was
>> [laughter]
>> Cut ourselves out of the show.
>> we just cut ourselves out. We did a live
show and for a period we just cut
ourselves out. We gave ourselves a
break. But, you know, it's good. An
audience there, you want to mix up, give
people a little variety, so that the
show is not just all like talking heads
talking to each other.
>> That's right. And I think the
presentation, I mean, we had the perfect
guest, truly. We had literally someone
who's known as the king of charts
talking essentially about how AI is
eating the entire US economy as well as
US financial markets.
>> No, and he really is great. So,
basically, you know, what you're going
to see is like his live presentation of
charts. He was really good. You could
tell he's done this before, but also a
very like bold thesis, which is like,
okay, like we What do we think of as the
new diversified portfolio? We might have
at one point thought that the
diversified portfolio was essentially
the classic 60% stock, 40% bond. You
sort of mix it up, you get a little
diversification. And his basic thesis is
no, there's AI has infected every part
of the market. And so that to construct
a balanced portfolio, you really need to
have essentially your AI component and
your non-AI component.
>> Yeah. Basically, everyone is exposed to
one factor now, which is AI. So, our
perfect guest was of course Torsten
Slok. He is a partner and chief
economist over at Apollo. Enjoy the
charts.
>> So, the idea with this segment was to
give the host a little break and try to
look at exactly the consequences of the
discussion we had, namely what's going
on with the economy when you have so
much demand for compute, when you have
so much demand for data centers.
And the first way to look at this is of
course to look at what is the overall
situation when it comes to the number of
data centers in the US economy at the
moment. This chart here shows you to the
left that today there are roughly around
4,000 data centers in the US.
And as you can see to the right, the
number of data centers that are
announced or under construction is about
3,000.
So, obviously, as the conversation also
led to is the conclusion that we have a
huge need for compute.
And that of course becomes very
important when we begin to think about
what are the consequences of AI and what
are the consequences of the data center
build-out for the economy and therefore
of course overall for GDP.
And one way to look at this question is
to look at what are the engines of
growth in the US economy at the moment.
And that's what you see in this chart
here. And it's not only AI that's
driving growth in the US at the moment.
The most important thing is that growth
is of course coming from the data center
build-out and the associated energy
spending. We are also beginning to see
some early signs of productivity gains
from AI and we calculate that that
source on its own is going to add about
one percentage point to GDP growth in
2026. Remember GDP normally grows at two
and now roughly one percentage point is
going to come from AI alone.
But there's also another source of
growth in the middle, namely industrial
renaissance.
There's a very strong political desire
at the moment to bring back production
of semiconductors. This was a Chips Act
in 2022 under Biden. Very strong the
desire was to bring back production of
capacity of chips. And of course, that
has been ongoing now for several years.
There's also very strong support of for
bringing back production of prescription
drugs. The pharmaceutical sector is also
likely going to see a lift because of
the industrial renaissance. Again,
politicians saying we need to do home
shoring of a lot of capacity that used
to be in India, in China, elsewhere, but
now needs to be done in the US. And
finally, obviously, we also have a lot
of activity when it comes to defense.
And that is also an engine of growth
that is also rather unusual, but for
obvious reasons is also seeing a lot of
activity. So this is a second source of
growth that is also a significant
tailwind over 2026.
And finally, we also have the One Big
Beautiful Bill, which is also of course,
a very important source of growth.
Remember, the One Big Beautiful Bill
lowered taxes retroactively. So Trump
lowered taxes starting January 1, 2025.
The consequence of that is that
households on average this year will get
a tax refund of $4,000. Last year the
average refund was $3,000. So that's
$1,000 more per household. And given we
have more than 130 million households,
that means that over the next 6 months,
we will see going into the midterm
election more than $100 billion
in spending for consumers because of the
One Big Beautiful Bill lowering taxes
for households. And if you add to that
also the tailwind coming from 100%
immediate expensing, there's also some
provisions for infrastructure and
defense, you also get according to the
Congressional Budget Office that the One
Big Beautiful Bill will also be boosting
GDP roughly also by one percentage
point. And why is this important? This
is extremely important because all these
things are not a function of what the
Fed is doing.
If the Fed raises interest, if Fed
lowers interest rates, it doesn't
matter. We will still have an AI boom.
If the Fed lowers interest rates, if the
Fed raises interest rates, it doesn't
matter. Politicians are still saying we
need to do home storing of manufacturing
capacity. And finally, also the one big
beautiful bill, same story. If the Fed
raises rates, it doesn't matter. It has
already been written in the law. The
money is already being paid out. So, in
that sense, when rates have gone up, the
economy has not been slowing down. And
that's exactly why nonfarm payrolls next
Friday is likely to come in at a very
strong pace because you have seen ADP
over the last several weeks be very
strong with 30, 40,000 jobs being
created every single month. So, a very
important difference between the US and
the rest of the world is that the rest
of the world, take Europe, does not have
an AI boom. Europe does not have an
industrial renaissance, and Europe
definitely does not have the one big
beautiful bill. So, the consequence is
we have some very unique tailwinds to
the US economic outlook at the moment
that are very, very important when we
think about what's going on in financial
markets, and therefore very important
when we think about what is the outlook
overall. And if you now take this to
your Bloomberg screen and ask the
question, "Okay, so we have some
tailwinds. What does that mean for
growth? What does that mean for
inflation? How should I think about
asset allocation and investing with the
backdrop of some very unique forces
driving growth at the moment?" And this
chart here is ECF CGO on your Bloomberg
screen. The white numbers is the median
of the 60 people from the consensus who
submit their forecast. And look at the
second line in the chart. It shows you
GDP growth. GDP growth, honestly, in the
next six quarters is actually quite
boring. It's more like 2%. It's a little
bit weaker, as you can see, for the next
several quarters, probably because of
the conflict in the Middle East, but
generally speaking, GDP growth is not
going to do much, not drama to the
upside, no drama to the downside, just
relatively steady at around 2%. But
where is all the action? Have a look at
the squared box in the middle. The
consensus is telling you, and that's
also the Fed's forecast, that's also our
forecast for that matter, that consensus
is saying inflation is going to go up.
Inflation is going to rise from 2.7 to
3.7 and then 3.4, 3.3, 2.9 and only come
down to the Fed's 2% target as we get to
the middle of 2027.
Why is that important? That makes it
very, very difficult for the Federal
Reserve to cut interest rates. Remember,
there are 12 voting members on the FOMC.
One of them is Kevin Warsh. The other 11
members have literally just said, "We're
not cutting interest rates." In fact,
three of them are beginning to say,
"Maybe we should think about hiking
rates." So, the key backdrop for this
strong growth outlook is that at the
same time we have that inflation is
higher for longer and as a result,
interest rates will be higher for
longer. So, a very important conclusion
when we think about the economic
outlook, it's not only about the line
that is called private investment where
you see very strong growth coming from
data center spending, but it's also the
backdrop that is a very complex
situation where you also have that
inflation and therefore rates, in this
case in the front end, are going to stay
higher for longer simply because
inflation is higher for longer. So,
let's now turn to what this also means
for financial markets that AI has played
such a big role for the economy and
let's now turn to see what does it then
mean for asset allocation and for
investing. If you think about your 60/40
asset allocation, normally you think
about, well, 60% in equities, 40% in
bonds. Let's look at what's going on in
the equity side first and it's very
clear, as we all know very well, the 10
biggest stocks in the S&P 500 now make
up 39% of the index. In other words, the
S&P 500 is no longer a diverse set of
stocks. It really is a very big bet on
AI.
And what's interesting is that that's
actually now also more and more the case
in fixed income. So, think about the 40
side of your asset allocation, so 60% is
equities, 40% in fixed income. What's
going on in fixed income? Well, if you
look at investment grade credit to the
left, year-to-date issuance, you've seen
that 49% of issuance is hyperscalers. In
other words, it used to be the case that
investment grade was mainly financials,
but now hyperscalers are coming in
because they need to get financing for
the data centers. And that's why roughly
half of issuance this year has been
coming from AI or from the hyperscalers.
Even for venture capital, it used to be
the case that venture capital that was
invention of prescription drugs, pharma,
biotech, but now 87% of venture capital
is also AI. And finally, even for high
yield, you also have that AI makes up a
growing share. So, the problem is now
that we begin to think about this from a
60/40 portfolio perspective, is that AI
is now everywhere in equity and fixed
income portfolios. And if there's one
thing that we have learned in finance in
the last 15 years, it is that you should
make sure that you are invested
according to certain factors. And
suddenly, we all wake up and we're all
exposed to one factor and one factor
alone, namely AI is everywhere in my
equity portfolio and now AI is actually
also everywhere in my bond portfolio.
And that's why, and I say this a little
bit as a joke, but it really ends up
being really true, that it used to be
the case that 60/40 was oh, I just buy
some bonds, I buy some equity, and when
something goes up, the other part goes
down and vice versa. But we've almost
gotten to a point where hold on, now
there's AI everywhere in my equity
portfolio and now there's AI everywhere
in my bond portfolio. So, now it's
almost become the case that instead of
just being exposed to one factor, namely
AI, maybe I need to think about this
much more that the next the new 60/40 is
that am I exposed to AI, am I also
making sure that I'm exposed to non-AI.
And the last conclusion to combine those
two things together is of course that
this is beginning to put some upward
pressure on yields also because of
hyperscalers issuance being a substitute
also for treasuries. And that means that
the yield curve is not only under upward
pressure because of inflation, the yield
curve in the belly is also under upward
pressure because of issuance of
hyperscalers. And finally, in the long
end, the yield curve is also under
upward pressure because of issuance of
treasuries. So, the key conclusion is
from a macroeconomic perspective is that
the economy is doing just fine and the
bottom line is the tailwinds coming from
the data center growth also from the
industrial renaissance and at the same
time also the one big beautiful bill. It
tells you that growth for the rest of
this year is at risk of accelerating and
that of course becomes very important
when we already have an outlook that
inflation is telling you that we have a
profile where inflation in particular if
the straight of most remains closed that
inflation could be even higher and the
mountain even higher than the Bloomberg
screenshot that you saw in terms of what
expectations are for the next 18 months.
So the bottom line when you look at the
outlook is AI is literally everywhere in
your portfolios and AI is extremely
important for the GDP outlook. So it
becomes very critical to think about
this in the form of well what happens if
AI is more successful and in the worst
case what happens if AI is less
successful. Not only will GDP growth
slow down but our portfolios not only in
equities but also in fixed income will
unfortunately also be at risk if AI does
not deliver on the significant promises
that we're seeing at the moment.
>> All right, that was Torsten Slok of
Apollo's presentation. Lots of good
charts in there. I'm Tracy Alloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the Stalwart. Follow our producers
Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen Armendarez at
at Dash Bot Caleb Brooks at Caleb Brooks
and Kevin Lozano at Kevin Lloyd Lozano.
>> And for more Odd Lots content you should
check out our daily newsletter. You can
find that at bloomberg.com/oddlots.
>> And you can chat about all of these
topics 24/7 in our Discord
discord.gg/oddlots.
>> And if you enjoyed Torsten's
presentation then please leave us a
comment or like the video or better yet
subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.